A document proposing a way to typeset CP Optimizer models in LaTeX is available [here](conventions.pdf).

Here is the adaptation of these conventions that we will adopt for typesetting CP Optimizer models in text format.

## Scopes

A scope is a set of tuples used for indexing. For describing a scope, we use the
classical set notation. For instance if N and M are two integers:
* `i in [1,N]` is the set of all integers i in {1,2,...,N}
* `i in [1,N], j in [1,M]` is the cartesian product (i,j) in [1,N]x[1,M]
* `i,j in [1,N] | i!=j` is the subset of the cartesian product [1,N]x[1,N] such that i!=j

When the order of the elements in the scope is important (like for instance
in the vectors or matrices below), the tuples are supposed to be generated by
iterating on the indexes from left to right. For instance:
`i,j in [1,3] | i!=j` will generate the ordered set of tuples (1,2),(1,3),(2,1),(2,3),(3,1),(3,2).

## Decision variables

CP Optimizer provides different types of decision variables (integer, interval, sequence, state function). The general syntax for defining a decision variable is:

```
TYPE NAME    DOMAIN
TYPE NAME[s] DOMAIN : s in SCOPE
```

As a rule of thumb, we denote decision variables with lower cases whereas constants of the problem (including known stepwise or piecewise linear functions) are denoted with upper cases.

### Integer variables

The keyword for the type of an integer variable is `integer`. The domain is a set of integers. So for instance we can have:

```
integer x      in [1,N]
integer y[i]   in [2k+1 : k in [0,M)]  : i in [1,N]
integer z[i,j] in [0,1]                : i,j in [1,N], i!=j
```

### Interval variables

The keyword for the type of an interval variable is `interval`. The domain is a subset of domain specifiers in the following order, separated by a comma:
* Minimal start (R) and maximal end (D) range: `in [R,D]` (default: `in [0,+oo]`)
* Specification whether the interval is optional: `optional` (default: not optional that is, interval is present)
* Value or range for the interval size: `size = S` or `size in [S1,S2]` (default: `size in [0,+oo]`)
* Intensity function (stepwise function F): `intensity = F` (default: no intensity)

For instance:

```
interval x 
interval y[i] in [-H,H]                                                  : i in [1,N]
interval z[i,j] in [0,H], optional, size in [A[i],B[i]], intensity=F[j]  : i in [1,N], j in [1,M] 
```
